zotero
===SOURCE===APPLICATION
abc: an R package for approximate Bayesian
computation (ABC)
Katalin Csille´ ry1*, Olivier Franc¸ ois2 and Michael G. B. Blum2
1Irstea, UR EMGR, 2 rue de la Papeterie, F-38402 Saint Martin d’He`res, France; and 2Computational and
Mathematical Biology Team, Laboratoire Techniques de l’Inge´nierie Me´dicale et de la Complexite´, Universite´ Joseph
Fourier, Grenoble 1, Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque UMR5525, F-38706 La Tronche, France
Summary
1. Many recent statistical applications involve inference under complex models, where it is compu-
tationally prohibitive to calculate likelihoods but possible to simulate data. Approximate Bayesian
computation (ABC) is devoted to these complex models because it bypasses the evaluation of the
likelihood function by comparing observed and simulated data.
2. We introduce the R package ‘abc’ that implements several ABC algorithms for performing
parameter estimation and model selection. In particular, the recently developed nonlinear heteros-
cedastic regression methods for ABC are implemented. The ‘abc’ package also includes a cross-vali-
dation tool for measuring the accuracy of ABC estimates and to calculate the misclassiﬁcation
probabilities when performing model selection. The main functions are accompanied by appropri-
ate summary and plotting tools.
3. R is already widely used in bioinformatics and several ﬁelds of biology. The R package ‘abc’ will
make the ABC algorithms available to a large number of R users. ‘abc’ is a freely available R pack-
age under the GPL license, and it can be downloaded at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
abc/index.html.
Key-words: coalescent, model-based inference, neural networks, population genetics
Introduction
In recent years, approximate Bayesian computation (ABC)
has become a popular method for parameter inference and
model selection under complex models, where the evaluation
of the likelihood function is computationally prohibitive. ABC
bypasses exact likelihood calculations via the use of summary
statistics and simulations, which, in turn, allows the consider-
ation of highly complex models. The name ABC was ﬁrst
coined by Beaumont et al. (2002) in population genetics, for
inference under coalescent models, but its origin goes back to
works by Tavare´ et al. (1997); Pritchard et al. (1999). ABC is
now increasingly applied especially in ecology or systems
biology (for reviews of ABC methods and applications, see
Beaumont 2010; Bertorelle et al. 2010; Csille´ ry et al. 2010).
Software implementations of ABC dedicated to particular
problems have already been developed in these ﬁelds
(Anderson et al. 2005; Hickerson et al. 2007; Cornuet et al.
2008; Jobin & Mountain 2008; Tallmon et al. 2008; Lopes
et al. 2009; Thornton 2009; Bray et al. 2010; Cornuet et al.
2010; Liepe et al. 2010; Wegmann et al. 2010; Huang et al.
2011).
The integration of ABC in a software package poses several
challenges. First, data simulation, which is in the core of any
ABC analysis, is speciﬁc to the model in question. Thus, many
existing ABC software are speciﬁc to a particular class of mod-
els (Hickerson et al. 2007; Cornuet et al. 2008; Lopes et al.
2009) or even to the estimation of a particular parameter (Tall-
mon et al. 2008). Further, model comparison is an integral
part of any Bayesian analysis; thus, it is essential to provide
software, where users are able to ﬁt diﬀerent models to their
data. Second, an ABC analysis often follows a trial–error
approach, where users experiment with diﬀerent models, ABC
algorithms or summary statistics. Therefore, it is important
that users can run diﬀerent analyses using batch ﬁles, which
contain each analysis as a sequence of commands. Third, ABC
is subject to intensive research, and many new algorithms have
been published in the past few years (Beaumont et al. 2002,
*Correspondence author. E-mail: kati.csillery@gmail.com
Correspondence site: http://www.respond2articles.com/MEE/
Methods in Ecology and Evolution 2012, 3, 475–479
doi: 10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00179.x
 2012 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution  2012 British Ecological Society
 2041210x, 2012, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00179.x by University Of Wisconsin, Wiley Online Library on [25/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2009; Bortot et al. 2007; Sisson et al. 2007; Blum 2010). Thus,
an ABC software should be ﬂexible enough to accommodate
the new developments of the ﬁeld.
Here, we introduce a generalist R package ‘abc’, which aims
to address the above challenges (R Development Core Team
2011). The price to pay for the generality and ﬂexibility is that
the simulation of data and the calculation of summary statis-
tics are left to the users. However, simulation software might
be called from an R session, which opens up the possibility for
a highly interactive ABC analysis. For coalescent models,
for instance, users can apply one of the many existing software
for simulating genetic data such as ‘ms’ (Hudson 2002) or
‘fastsimcoal’ (Excoﬃer & Foll 2011). The calculation of
summary statistics could be performed using either R or some
speciﬁc software such as ‘msABC’ (Pavlidis et al. 2010), which
runs ‘ms’ and calculates summary statistics from the output
ﬁles. ABC methods have also been developed to handle full
data (Sousa et al. 2009) – allele frequencies in population
genetics – but the ‘abc’ package is dedicated to summary statis-
tic approaches, which represent the bulk of the literature.
R provides many advantages in the context of ABC: (i) R
already possesses the necessary tools to handle, analyse and
visualise large data sets, (ii) sequences of R commands can be
saved in a script ﬁle and (iii) R is a free and collaborative
project; thus, new algorithms can be easily integrated to the
package (e.g. via contributions from their authors).
Implementation
The main steps of an ABC analysis follow the general scheme
of any Bayesian analysis: formulating a model, ﬁtting the
model to data (parameter estimation) and improving the
model by checking its ﬁt (posterior predictive checks) and com-
paring it to other models (Gelman et al. 2003; Csille´ ry et al.
2010). ‘abc’ provides functions for the inference and model
comparison steps, and generic tools of R can be used for model
checking.
To use the package, the following R objects should be pre-
pared: a vector of the observed summary statistics, a matrix of
the simulated summary statistics, where each row corresponds
to a simulation and each column corresponds to a summary
statistic, and ﬁnally, a matrix of the simulated parameter
values, where each row corresponds to a simulation and each
column corresponds to a parameter.
PARAMETER INFERENCE
For the sake of clarity, we recall the general scheme of param-
eter estimation with ABC. Suppose that we want to compute
the posterior probability distribution of a univariate or multi-
variate parameter, h. A parameter value hi is sampled from its
prior distribution to simulate a data set yi, for i ¼ 1,…,n
where n is the number of simulations. A set of summary statis-
tics S(yi) is computed from the simulated data and compared
to the summary statistics obtained from the actual data S(y0)
using a distance measure d. We consider the Euclidean
distance for d, and the ‘abc’ package standardises each
summary statistic with a robust estimate of the standard devi-
ation (the median absolute deviation). If d(S(yi),S(y0)) (i.e. the
distance between S(yi) and S(y0)) is less than a given thresh-
old, the parameter value hi is accepted. To set a threshold for
d, above which simulations are rejected, the user has to pro-
vide the tolerance rate, which is deﬁned as the proportion of
accepted simulations. The accepted hi’s form a sample from
an approximation of the posterior distribution. The estima-
tion of the posterior distribution can be improved by the use
of regression techniques, which we detail in the following par-
agraph.
The function "abc" implements three ABC algorithms for
constructing the posterior distribution from the accepted hi’s: a
rejection method and two regression-based correction methods
that use either local linear regression (Beaumont et al. 2002) or
neural networks (Blum & Franc¸ ois 2010). When the rejection
method ("rejection") is selected, the accepted hi’s are con-
sidered as a sample from the posterior distribution (Pritchard
et al. 1999). The two regression methods ("loclinear" and
"neuralnet") implement an additional step to correct for
the imperfect match between the accepted, S(yi), and observed
summary statistics, S(y0), using the following regression equa-
tion in the vicinity of S(y0)
hi ¼ mðSðyiÞÞ þ i;
eqn 1
where m is the regression function and the i’s are centred
random variables with equal variance. Simulations that
closely match S(y0) are given more weight by assigning to
each simulation (hi,S(yi)) the weight K[d(S(yi),S(y0))], and
the package implements diﬀerent statistical kernels K. The
local linear model ("loclinear") assumes a linear func-
tion for m, while neural networks account for the non-
linearity of m and allow users to reduce the dimension of
the set of summary statistics. Once the regression is per-
formed, a weighted sample from the posterior distribution
is obtained by correcting the hi’s as follows:
h
i ¼ ^mðSðy0ÞÞ þ ^i;
eqn 2
where ^mðÞ is the estimated conditional mean and the ^is
are the empirical residuals of the regression (Beaumont
et al. 2002). Additionally, a correction for heteroscedastic-
ity is applied, by default, in "abc",
h
i ¼ ^mðSðy0ÞÞ þ ^rðSðy0ÞÞ
^rðSðyiÞÞ ^i
eqn 3
where ^rðÞ is the estimated conditional standard deviation
(Blum & Franc¸ ois 2010).
The function "abc" returns an object of class "abc" that
can be printed, summarised and plotted using the S3 methods
of the R generic functions, "print", "summary", "hist"
and "plot". The function "print" returns a description of
the object. The function "summary" calculates summaries of
the posterior distributions, such as the mode, mean, median
and credible intervals, taking into account the posterior
weights, when appropriate. The "hist" function displays the
histogram of the weighted posterior sample. The "plot"
function generates various plots that allow the evaluation of
K. Csille´ry, O. Franc¸ois & M. G. B. Blum
 2012 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution  2012 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 3, 475–479
 2041210x, 2012, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00179.x by University Of Wisconsin, Wiley Online Library on [25/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

the quality of estimation when one of the regression methods
is used. The following plots are generated: a density plot of
the prior distribution, a density plot of the posterior distribu-
tion estimated with and without regression-based correction,
a scatter plot of the Euclidean distances as a function of the
parameter values and a normal Q–Q plot of the residuals
from the regression. When the heteroscedastic regression
model is used, a normal Q–Q plot of the standardised residu-
als is displayed (see Fig. 1 panel a).
Finally, we note that alternative algorithms exist that sample
from an updated distribution that is closer in shape to the pos-
terior than to the prior (Marjoram et al. 2003; Beaumont et al.
2009; Wegmann et al. 2010). However, we do not implement
these methods in the ‘abc’ package because they require the
repeated use of the simulation software.
POSTERIOR PREDICTIVE CHECKS
We strongly recommend that users perform posterior predic-
tive checks after ﬁtting their model to the data. There is no spe-
ciﬁc function in the package ‘abc’ for posterior predictive
checks; nevertheless, the task can be easily carried out using R
(a) Parameter inference and regression diagnostics
0e + 00
2e−05
Ne
Density
Prior
N = 1000   Bandwidth = 1926
0·00000
0·00015
Ne
Density
Posterior with "loclinear"
N = 500   Bandwidth = 486·3
"rejection" and prior as reference
–2
–1
Ne
log euclidean distance
Euclidean distances
N(All/plotted) =  50 000/1000
–3
–2
–1
–5000
Residuals from lsfit()
Normal Q−Q plot
Theoretical quantiles
Residuals
Ne
True value 
Estimated value
bott
const
exp
Frequency
(b) Cross-validation
(c) Model misclassification
Fig. 1. Typical graphical outputs of the R ‘abc’ package (model selection and estimation of the eﬀective population size Ne from population
genetic data). (a) Parameter inference and regression diagnostics: plots show (clock-wise) the prior distribution, the distances between observed
and simulated summary statistics as a function of the parameter values (where red points indicate the accepted values), normal Q–Q plot of the
residuals of the regression, and the posterior distribution obtained with and without the regression correction method (and the prior distribution,
for reference). (b) Cross-validation for parameter estimation: plot shows the estimated values as a function of true parameter values. Diﬀerent
colours correspond to diﬀerent values of the tolerance rate. (c) Model misclassiﬁcation: a graphical illustration of the confusion matrix for three
models. The colours from dark to light grey correspond to models bott, const, exp, accordingly. If the simulations were perfectly classiﬁed,
each bar would have a single colour of its own corresponding model. The following R code can be used to re-generate these plots.
> library(abc)
> data(human)
> cv.modsel <- cv4postpr(models, stat.3pops.sim, nval¼50, tol¼.01, method¼"mnlogistic")
> plot(cv.modsel)
> stat.italy.sim <- subset(stat.3pops.sim, subset¼models¼¼"bott")
> cv.res.reg <- cv4abc(data.frame(Na¼par.italy.sim [,"Ne"]), stat.italy.sim,
+ nval¼200, tols¼c(.005,.001), method¼"loclinear")
> plot(cv.res.reg, caption¼"Ne")
> res <- abc(target¼stat.voight["italian",], param¼data.frame(Na¼par.italy.sim [, "Ne"]),
+ sumstat¼stat.italy.sim, tol¼0.005, transf¼c("log"), method¼"neuralnet")
> plot(res, param¼par.italy.sim [, "Ne"])
R package: abc
 2012 The Authors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution  2012 British Ecological Society, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 3, 475–479
 2041210x, 2012, 3, Downloaded from https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00179.x by University Of Wisconsin, Wiley Online Library on [25/10/2022]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

and the simulation software. A fully executable example using