pmc
===SOURCE===Results Cellular protein composition is altered by aneuploidy To understand the global consequences of aneuploidy on the proteome, we used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) ( Ong et al., 2002 ) and liquid chromatography—tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to profile protein abundances in 12 different disomic strains (Disomes I, II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV and XVI) ( Figure 1A,B , ‘Materials and methods’). These experiments revealed quantitative information for ∼70–80% of all verified open reading frames (ORFs) in the disomic strains relative to wild-type cells ( Figure 1B ,  Figure 1—source data 1 ). A comparison of wild-type/wild-type cells showed a standard deviation (SD) of the log 2  ratios equal to 0.35 ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1 ). Analysis of the protein abundances encoded by genes on the duplicated chromosomes of all 12 disomic strains demonstrates that on average protein levels increased approximately twofold ( Figure 1B ). This correlation is apparent when log 2  ratios of protein levels of disomic strains relative to wild-type cells are sorted by the chromosomal position of their encoding genes ( Figure 1B ). 10.7554/eLife.03023.003 Figure 1. Proteome quantification of aneuploid yeast strains. ( A ) Schematic of the approach utilized in stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and liquid chromatography—mass spectrometry. ( B ) The plots show the log 2  ratio of the relative protein abundance of disomes compared to wild-type cells grown in synthetic medium. Protein levels are shown in the order of the chromosomal location of their encoding genes. Protein levels of duplicated chromosomes are shown in red. ( C ) Schematic of the approach utilized in isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative mass spectrometry. ( D ) The plots show the log 2  ratio of the relative protein abundance of disomes compared to wild-type cells grown in rich medium (YEPD). Protein levels are shown in the order of the chromosomal location of their encoding genes. Protein levels of duplicated chromosomes are shown in red. DOI: 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03023.003 10.7554/eLife.03023.004 Figure 1—source data 1. TMT and SILAC data. DOI: 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03023.004 10.7554/eLife.03023.005 Figure 1—figure supplement 1. SILAC and TMT mass spectrometry of wild-type vs wild-type cells. ( A ) The plots show the log 2  ratio of the relative protein abundance of wild-type/wild-type cells grown in synthetic medium (upper panel). Protein levels are shown in the order of the chromosomal location of their encoding genes. Histogram of the log 2  ratios of the protein levels of wild-type/wild-type cells (lower panel). Fit to a normal distribution is shown (black line). ( B ) The plots show the log 2  ratio of the relative protein abundance of wild-type/wild-type cells grown in YEPD medium (upper panel). Protein levels are shown in the order of the chromosomal location of their encoding genes. Histogram of the log 2  ratios of the protein levels of wild-type/wild-type cells (lower panel). Fit to a normal distribution is shown (black line). ( C ) Chart of conversion of log 2  ratios to fold changes. DOI: 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03023.005 10.7554/eLife.03023.006 Figure 1—figure supplement 2. Transcriptome and proteome quantification of aneuploid yeast strains. ( A ) Gene expression and protein levels of wild-type and aneuploid strains grown in synthetic medium, ordered by chromosome position. Experiments (columns) are ordered by the number of the chromosome that is present in two copies. ( B ) Comparison of the mRNA vs protein levels in aneuploid strains grown synthetic medium. Pairwise comparison show a Pearson correlation coefficient (r) = 0.48. ( C ) Gene expression and protein levels of aneuploid strains relative to wild-type cells grown in YEPD medium, ordered by chromosome position. Experiments (columns) are ordered by the number of the chromosome that is present in two copies. ( D ) Comparison of the mRNA vs protein levels in aneuploid strains grown YEPD medium. Pairwise comparison show a Pearson correlation coefficient (r) = 0.49. DOI: 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03023.006 Growth conditions can significantly influence gene expression. Because aneuploidy increases genomic instability including higher rates of chromosome loss, disomic strains are grown in medium that selects for the presence of the duplicated chromosome (‘Materials and methods’). In addition, SILAC relies on the use of synthetic medium supplemented with ‘heavy’ or ‘light’ amino acids. To determine whether growth conditions affect the proteome composition of disomic strains, we grew cells in rich medium (YEPD) for a small number of generations and utilized isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative mass spectrometry (‘Materials and methods’,  Figure 1C ) to assess the proteome of the 12 disomic yeast strains. In total, we obtained quantitative informati