pmc
===SOURCE===Results Here, we demonstrate that gene expression across large genomic regions scales proportionally to whole chromosome copy number in chromosomally unstable CSCs. Also, we show that the differential expression of most genes between normal NSCs and glioblastoma CSCs is largely accounted for by copy number alterations. However, we identify 269 genes whose differential expression in glioblastoma CSCs relative to normal NSCs is independent of copy number. Moreover, a gene signature derived from the subset of genes that are differential expressed independent of copy number in glioblastoma CSCs correlates with tumor grade and is prognostic for patient survival.

Results Neural stem cells and glioblastoma cancer stem cells have distinct transcriptomes To investigate the relationship between gene expression levels and CNV in chromosomally unstable cells, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing of chromosomally unstable GliNS2 glioblastoma CSCs and control normal, diploid CB660 NSCs that were grown in identical serum-free culture conditions [ 9 ,  19 ,  20 ]. After performing data normalization and filtering steps, we obtained high quality data for 59 CB660 NSCs and 75 GliNS2 CSCs (Additional file  1 a-e). As an initial comparison of CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs, we performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering using the most variably expressed genes. Hierarchical clustering showed that CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs cluster into two distinct groups as expected (Fig.  1 a). As further validation, we performed principal component analysis (PCA), and similar to the unsupervised hierarchical clustering, we found that CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs separated into two distinct groups (Fig.  1 b). In addition, we used gene expression profiles to computationally infer the cell cycle phase of each cell. Specifically, we utilized previously published methods that combine a set of cell cycle annotated genes with a pair-based classifier to assign cell cycle phases [ 27 ,  28 ]. CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs had different percentages of cells in each phase of the cell cycle, but overall these differences were not statistically significant (Fig.  1 b-c). Fig. 1 CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs have distinct gene expression profiles.  a , Heatmap showing the normalized gene expression of the most variably expressed genes used for hierarchical clustering analysis. The top dendrogram shows that CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs cluster into two distinct populations. In the row above the heatmap, blue indicates CB660 NSCs and red indicates GliNS2 CSCs.  b , Principal component analysis (PCA) and cell cycle phase analysis of CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs. The graph shows the separation of CB660 NSCs (circles) and GliNS2 CSCs (triangles) into distinct groups. The color of the circles or triangles corresponds to the predicted cell cycle phase of each cell.  c , Pie plots showing the fraction of CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs in each phase of the cell cycle.  P  > 0.05; Chi-square test comparing the cell cycle profiles of CB660 NSCs and GliNS2 CSCs Chromosomal instability affects gene expression levels Since the technology to perform simultaneous single-cell DNA sequencing to obtain the copy number profile and single-cell RNA sequencing to obtain the gene expression profile of the same cell is not readily feasible, we used gene expression levels to computationally infer large-scale CNV in chromosomally unstable GliNS2 CSCs [ 29 ]. The approach is based upon a previously published method that averages gene expression over large genomic regions to infer whole chromosome copy number alterations [ 29 ]. Importantly, the method requires gene expression measurements from control diploid cells to establish reference gene expression levels [ 29 ]. More specifically, we calculated GliNS2 CSC relative gene expression levels against reference normal, diploid CB660 NSC gene expression and then determined the copy number of a gene as the average relative expression of its neighboring 50 downstream genes and 50 upstream genes. We repeated this iteratively to predict the copy number of large genomic regions. Initially, we validated this method using matched copy number and gene expression data from glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA) samples in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). As expected, there was significantly more inferred CNV in both GBM and BRCA tumor samples compared to normal samples with a median Spearman correlation = 0.43 or = 0.46 between the estimated CNV and known CNV across all GBM and BRCA tumor samples, respectively (Additional file  2  a-d and Additional file  3  a-d). As further validation, we calculated a chromosomal instability index to quantify CNV by determining the average absolute estimated copy number (ECN) of each tumor sample, and as expected, both GBM and BRCA tumor samples had a significant increase in the chromosomal instability index compared to normal samples (Additional file  2 b and Additional file  3 b). Also, the BRC