pmc
===SOURCE===Results Shallow WGS and alignment to the reference genome Shallow WGS was performed with DNA isolated from FFPE sections of 15 LGGs ( van Thuijl et al. 2014 ), two oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs AB042 and AB052) ( Bhattacharya et al. 2011 ), and the breast cancer cell line BT474 on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 using run mode SR50, which sequences only one end of the DNA molecules for 50 base pairs. In general, these DNA samples were multiplexed with others so that each HiSeq sequencing lane contained between 18 and 22 total samples. We use sample LGG150 to illustrate our analysis procedures in the main article text and figures because it contains a range of different types of genome alterations that are typical for solid tumors. Complete analyses of all LGG samples, BT474, AB042, and AB052, including whole-genome plots and enlarged views of chromosome 1, are presented in Supplemental Figures S1–S3. In addition, we present noise data from more than 1000 mostly formalin-fixed archival specimens obtained from many hospitals throughout Europe. On average, we obtained 9.2 million total reads per sample (range 3.1–23.9) for the multiplexed samples, of which 8.2 million (range 3.0–22.9) aligned to the human reference genome with the sequence alignment algorithm BWA ( Li and Durbin 2009 ). We filtered out PCR duplicate reads and reads with mapping qualities lower than 37 (highest value returned by BWA), resulting in a final average read count of 6.0 million (range 2.4–18.1) per sample. Read counts for the 15 LGGs, AB042, AB052, and BT474 are provided in Supplemental Table S1. Binning of sequence reads We divided the human reference genome into nonoverlapping, fixed-sized bins. We use 15-kb bins in the analysis presented here because this results in approximately the same number of bins as the number of array elements on 180K oligonucleotide CGH arrays and provides reasonable noise levels with as few as 6 million reads. We note, however, that any bin size could be used, and such an option is provided in the accompanying software package, QDNAseq. Removal of 12,893 bins that were completely composed of uncharacterized bases (denoted with N’s in the human reference genome sequence) resulted in a total number of 179,187 autosomal bins. We determined raw copy number estimates by counting the number of reads in each bin. The median-normalized log 2 -transformed read counts, the raw copy number profile, for sample LGG150 is shown in  Figure 1A . Regions of low-level loss and gain (e.g., on chromosomes 10 and 20, respectively) are apparent in the profile. In addition, some very narrow regions of highly elevated read counts and a substantial number of bins with very low read counts are present. The horizontal stripes of data points are due to the integer nature of the read counts. Experience based on classical cytogenetics and array CGH suggests that many features of this profile reflect characteristics of the sequencing and analysis process rather than true copy number variation ( Baldwin et al. 2008 ). Figure 1. Correction to read counts. Copy number profiles from ( A ) uncorrected and ( C ) corrected read counts; ( B ) median read counts per bin as a function of GC content and mappability; and ( D ) the corresponding LOESS fit for sample LGG150. Regions of the isobar plots that are white contain no bins with that combination of GC and mappability. In the copy number profiles, bins are ordered along the  x -axis by their genomic positions, and the  y -axis shows median-normalized log 2 -transformed data. Small triangles at the  top  and  bottom  edges represent data points that fall outside the plot area.  Upper left  corners show the number and size of bins.  Upper right  corners of the median read counts plot shows the total number of sequence reads, and  upper right  corners of the copy number profiles the expected and measured standard deviation. The expected standard deviation (E  σ ) is defined as  , where  N  is the average number of reads per bin. The measured standard deviation   is calculated from the data with a mean-scaled and 0.1%-trimmed first-order estimate, prior to log 2  transforming the data for plotting (see text). Correction of read counts It is well established that raw read counts are affected by GC content and mappability of the sequence reads ( Benjamini and Speed 2012 ;  Derrien et al. 2012 ;  Rieber et al. 2013 ). Published analysis methods generally correct for these factors independently if corrections for both are used. Although independent correction is effective for many cases, genome profiles from some samples, especially those that are formalin-fixed, contain clearly artifactual variations. Independent correction for GC and mappability is appropriate only if these two factors do not interact in their effects on read counts. We desired to determine if simultaneous correction might provide improved read count profiles. We implemented simultaneous correction by calculating the median read co