pmc
===SOURCE===RESULTS Chromosome mis-segregation rarely leads to p53 activation Previous studies reported that chromosome mis-segregation causes p53 activation and a p53-dependent cell cycle arrest ( Li et al., 2010 ;  Thompson and Compton, 2010 ). The aneuploid state  per se  or events accompanying chromosome mis-segregation could be responsible for this p53 activation. To distinguish between these possibilities we examined the immediate consequences of chromosome mis-segregation using live cell microscopy. Several methods have been developed to induce chromosome mis-segregation. For example, compounds that interfere with microtubule dynamics or microtubule – kinetochore attachment cause a SAC dependent delay in mitosis and induce chromosome mis-segregation. Inducing chromosome mis-segregation in this manner was shown to be associated with p53 activation in the subsequent G1 phase ( Thompson and Compton, 2010 ). However, mitotic arrest exceeding ~100 minutes induces a p53-dependent G1 arrest irrespective of whether or not chromosomes are mis-segregated ( Uetake and Sluder, 2010 ). We too observed this phenomenon. We analyzed cells that experienced an extended mitosis induced by the kinesin Eg5 inhibitor monastrol by live cell imaging ( Mayer et al., 1999 ). This analysis showed that the frequency of chromosome mis-segregation and subsequent G1 arrest increased with time spent in mitosis ( Figure S1 ), highlighting that without live imaging it is difficult to compare fates of cells with and without mis-segregation due to the missing information about arrest duration. To avoid G1 arrest caused by a prolonged mitosis, we generated aneuploid cells by interfering with SAC function rather than by activating the checkpoint. SAC inactivation does not delay cells in mitosis but instead accelerates progression through this cell cycle stage even when chromosomes are not attached to the spindle correctly ( Figure S2A ) and results in aneuploid progeny. We examined hTERT immortalized RPE-1 cells stably expressing PCNA-GFP (to determine S phase initiation) and RFP-H2B (to monitor chromosome segregation) grown in the presence of NMS-P715 or reversine. Both compounds inhibit the SAC kinase Mps1 ( Colombo et al., 2010 ;  Santaguida et al., 2010 ). Treatment with NMS-P715 or reversine led to severe chromosome segregation defects. Each chromosome mis-segregated in 6 – 8% of mitoses ( Figure S2D–F  and ( Santaguida et al., 2015 )) and virtually all cells harbored lagging chromosomes during anaphase and micronuclei in the following G1 ( Figure 1A  and  Figure S2B, C ). Despite severe chromosome mis-segregation, however, mitotic arrest did not occur but cells in fact progressed through mitosis faster than vehicle-control treated cells ( Figure S2A ). Notably, chromosome mis-segregation did not lead to arrest in the following G1 in the vast majority of aneuploid daughter cells (~80%;  Figure 1B ). This finding indicates that aneuploidy  per se  does not cause cell cycle arrest in G1. Although 80 percent of cells that mis-segregated chromosomes continued to divide, 9% of cells arrested in G1. To determine why these 9% of cells arrested in G1, we developed a method to separate G1-arrested cells from cycling cells following chromosome mis-segregation ( Figure 1C ). Briefly, we induced chromosome mis-segregation, and then transiently exposed cells to the microtubule poison nocodazole during the cell cycle following chromosome mis-segregation ( Figure 1C ). Dividing cells arrest in mitosis and can be removed from the plate by shake-off ( Figure 1C ). We repeated this procedure multiple times to also eliminate cells that progress through the cell cycle more slowly. The only cells that remained adhered to the plate following this procedure were cells that arrested in the interphase immediately following the mitosis during which chromosome mis-segregation was induced. Single cell sequencing revealed highly abnormal karyotypes characterized by multiple chromosome gains and losses in cells that arrested immediately following chromosome mis-segregation ( Figure 1D, E ). Whereas aneuploid cells that still divided harbored genomic imbalances, which involved less than 5% of their genomes, aneuploid arrested cells exhibited genomic imbalances involving more than 20% of their genomes ( Figure 1E ). In addition to whole chromosome gains and losses, 42% of cells that had arrested in G1 (5 out of 12 cells) also harbored segmental aneuploidies compared to about 18% of aneuploid cells that were still able to divide (2 out of 11 cells; note that the segmental gain on chromosome 10 was not included in this analysis as it is a characteristic of RPE-1 cells ( Zhang et al., 2015 )). Aneuploid arrested cells also exhibited signs of cellular senescence. Levels of p53, and the CDK inhibitors p21 and p16 were elevated ( Figure 1F ). Inactivation of the DNA damage checkpoint suppresses the G1 arrest following chromosome mis-segregation Segmental aneuploidies in G1 arrested