zotero
===SOURCE===T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y
© The Rockefeller University Press  $30.00
The Journal of Cell Biology, Vol. 180, No. 4, February 25, 2008 665–672
http://www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/
JCB
10.1083/jcb.200712029
JCB: REPORT
 Correspondence to Duane A. Compton: duane.a.compton@dartmouth.edu 
 Abbreviation used in this paper: CIN, chromosomal instability. 
 The online version of this manuscript contains supplemental material. 
 Introduction 
 Solid tumors can be highly aneuploid, with typical karyotypes 
ranging from 40 to 60 chromosomes but occasionally exceeding 
70 or more chromosomes (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/
Mitelman). How tumor cells acquire extra chromosomes and 
maintain them during cell division is currently unknown. In some 
cases, the unusually high numbers of chromosomes are segre-
gated faithfully, and the aneuploid karyotype displays little 
variation over time ( Storchova and Pellman, 2004 ). However, in 
other cases, aneuploid cells are genetically unstable and fre-
quently missegregate whole chromosomes in a phenomenon called 
chromo somal instability (CIN;  Lengauer et al., 1997 ). The ele-
vated rate of chromosome missegregation in aneuploid tumor 
cells with CIN causes phenotypic changes that contribute to tumor 
cell evolution and pose therapeutic challenges ( Gao et al., 2007 ). 
For example, chromosomal differences could change the growth 
properties of metastatic cells compared with the primary tumor 
( Kuukasjarvi et al., 1997 ). Increased chromosome missegregation 
rates in aneuploid tumor cells with CIN suggest an underlying 
defect in mitotic fi delity, and it has been presumed that persistent 
chromosome missegregation causes the high level of aneuploidy 
observed in tumor cells ( Lengauer et al., 1998 ). Defects in both 
bipolar spindle assembly (e.g., multipolar spindles) and the 
spindle assembly checkpoint have been identifi ed in some CIN 
tumor cell lines ( Cahill et al., 1998 ;  Lingle et al., 2002 ). However, 
those mitotic defects explain CIN in only a handful of cells, 
leaving the underlying cause of CIN in most aneuploid cells 
undetermined. Moreover, the question of whether CIN drives 
cells into a highly aneuploid state remains unanswered. 
 Results and discussion 
 Chromosomes display characteristic movements during align-
ment and segregation in mitosis that are directly visible by video 
microscopy. Defects in mitotic processes such as spindle check-
point function or multipolar spindle assembly predictably impair 
chromosome behavior by inducing premature entry into anaphase 
before chromosome alignment and multipolar anaphase, respec-
tively. Thus, to identify the mechanism of chromosome misseg-
regation in aneuploid human tumor cell lines with CIN, we used 
live cell video microscopy to examine chromosome behavior in 
both chromosomally stable and unstable human cells. We selected 
two chromosomally stable cell lines (HCT116 and RPE-1) and 
three aneuploid and CIN cell lines (HT29, MCF-7, and Caco2) 
for in-depth analyses in this study because these cells have 
been karyotypically defi ned (Table S1, available at http://www
.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200712029/DC1), represent differ-
ent tissues of origin, and have each been established in culture 
for many years. 
 Chromosomes align effi ciently at metaphase, segregate 
synchronously at anaphase, and form equivalent daughter cells 
after cytokinesis in the chromosomally stable colon cancer cell 
line HCT116 ( Fig. 1 and Video 1, available at http://www.jcb.org/
cgi/content/full/jcb.200712029/DC). From 35 cells examined 
by video microscopy, mitotic defects were detected in  < 10% of 
 S
olid tumors can be highly aneuploid and many dis-
play high rates of chromosome missegregation in a 
phenomenon called chromosomal instability (CIN). 
In principle, aneuploidy is the consequence of CIN, but the 
relationship between CIN and aneuploidy has not been 
clearly deﬁ ned. In this study, we use live cell imaging and 
clonal cell analyses to evaluate the ﬁ delity of chromosome 
segregation in chromosomally stable and unstable human 
cells. We show that improper microtubule – chromosome 
attachment (merotely) is a cause of chromosome missegre-
gation in unstable cells and that increasing chromosome 
missegregation rates by elevating merotely during consecu-
tive mitoses generates CIN in otherwise stable, near-diploid 
cells. However, chromosome missegregation compromises 
the proliferation of diploid cells, indicating that phenotypic 
changes that permit the propagation of nondiploid cells 
must combine with elevated chromosome missegregation 
rates to generate aneuploid cells with CIN.
 Examining the link between chromosomal instability 
and aneuploidy in human cells 
 Sarah L.  Thompson and  Duane A.  Compton 
 Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/180/4/665/1336425/jcb_200712029.pdf by University Of Wisconsin-Madison user on 25 October 2022

JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 4 • 2008
 
directly test the relationship between CIN and aneuploidy using 
human cultured cells. It has been shown that merotelic kineto-
chore attachments increase in mitotic cells recovering from drug 
treatments that perturb spindle organization ( Cimini et al., 1999 , 
 2001 ;  Knowlton et al., 2006 ). Those treatments alter the spatio-
temporal assembly of bipolar spindles, leading to increases in 
merotelic kinetochore attachment, but they do not inhibit the 
cell ’ s ability to eventually undergo anaphase with bipolar spindles. 
Thus, we used mitotic recovery from nocodazole or monastrol 
treatment as a strategy to increase the incidence of merotelic 
kinetochore attachments during mitosis in two chromosomally 
stable, near-diploid cell lines (HCT116 and RPE-1) to evaluate 
the relationship between CIN and aneuploidy. As expected, we 
observe increases in lagging chromatids at anaphase in both cell 
lines recovering from nocodazole or monastrol treatment in mi-
tosis (Fig. S1 B). Elevated frequencies of lagging chromatids 
required mitotic recovery from these drugs because lagging 
chromatid frequencies returned to basal rates if treatments were 
suspended. Fixed cell analyses verify that kinetochores of lagging 
chromatids are merotelically attached to spindle microtubules 
(Fig. S1 C). Time-lapse video microscopy confi rms that cells 
recovering from monastrol treatment do not enter anaphase 
before bipolar spindle assembly and chromosome alignment but dis-
play lagging chromatids at anaphase (Fig. S2 A and Video 4, avail-
able at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200712029/DC1). 
Also, these treatments do not impair cell cycle transit (Fig. S2 C) 
or induce DNA damage as judged by   H2AX histone isoform 
expression (Fig. S2 B). 
 To assess mitotic fi delity, we quantifi ed the modal chromo-
some number and the percentage of cells deviating from that 
mode in isolated colonies grown for 20 – 30 generations using 
FISH with chromosome-specifi c centromeric   -satellite DNA 
probes ( Fig. 2 A ). Colonies were either untreated or forced to 
recover from nocodazole- or monastrol-induced mitotic delay 
for one or more consecutive days during the growth of single-cell 
colonies ( Fig. 2 B ). Chromosome counts were performed on 
at least three independent colonies for each treatment (Tables 
S2 and S3, available at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb
.200712029/DC1). HCT116 cells did not survive monastrol-
induced mitotic recovery for 10 or more consecutive days, so 
monastrol recovery in these cells was limited to nine or fewer 
consecutive days or at every other day throughout growth of the 
cell colony. 
 Untreated HCT116 and RPE-1 cells are chromosomally 
stable and maintain a near-diploid karyotype ( Lengauer et al., 
1997 ) as judged by small deviations from a modal number of two 
for each chromosome ( Fig. 2 C and Tables S2 and S3). Rare treated 
HCT116 colonies show increases in the modal number of one or 
all chromosomes examined. Trisomy for one chromosome must 
occur by missegregation at the earliest stages of colony growth, 
and tetraploidy most likely arises when cells escape mitotic arrest 
in the presence of monastrol or nocodazole. However, cells in 
these colonies show no signifi cant increase in deviation from 
the modal chromosome number, confi rming that in this cell line, 
alterations in ploidy itself do not increase the rate of chromo-
some missegregation ( Lengauer et al., 1997 ). Other colonies of 
treated HCT116 and RPE-1 cells display signifi cant deviation 
cells, and these were lagging chromatids at anaphase and chro-
matin bridges. Similar frequencies of these mitotic errors are 
observed in fi xed cells that did not express GFP – histone H2B 
(7.2  ± 1.6% [SEM],  n = 400), demonstrating that the video results 
are representative (Fig. S1 A). Chromosomes in the chromosom-
ally unstable colon carcinoma (HT29 and Caco2) and breast 
cancer (MCF-7) cell lines also align effi ciently on bipolar spindles 
in metaphase, and no cells enter anaphase before the alignment 
of all chromosomes ( Fig. 1 and Videos 2 and 3), demonstrating 
checkpoint profi ciency as previously suggested ( Tighe et al., 2001 ). 
Lagging chromatids in anaphase is the most common mitotic 
defect detected and is observed in 24% of HT29 cells ( n = 34), 
75% of Caco2 cells ( n = 28), and 42% of MCF-7 cells ( n = 33) 
examined by video microscopy ( Fig. 1 ). In some cases, the lagging 
chromatids form micronuclei after cytokinesis. Similar frequen-
cies of anaphase cells with lagging chromatids are observed in 
fi xed cells that did not express GFP – histone H2B (19.0  ± 2.5% 
[SEM] in HT29 cells,  n = 300; 66.0  ± 1.7% [SEM] in Caco2 
cells,  n = 300; 50.0  ± 2.6% [SEM] in MCF-7 cells,  n = 300), 
demonstrating that these results are representative (Fig. S1 A). 
Kinetochores on lagging chromatids are often distorted and display 
microtubule bundles extending toward both spindle poles, demon-
strating that the failure to segregate properly at anaphase onset 
is caused by merotelic attachment of the kinetochore to spindle 
microtubules (Fig. S1 C;  Cimini et al., 2001 ,  2004 ). High per-
centages of anaphase cells with lagging chromatids is common 
in CIN cell lines derived from a variety of tumor tissues, includ-
ing colon, breast, and lung (Fig. S1 A), indicating that this mitotic 
defect is independent of tissue of origin or oncogenic mutation 
(e.g., p53 and adenomatous polyposis coli are reported to be wild 
type in MCF-7 cells but mutated in Caco2 cells; www.sanger
.ac.uk/perl/genetics/CGP/cosmic;  Liu and Bodmer, 2006 ). 
The number of lagging chromatids per anaphase in chromo-
somally unstable cells is between 3- and 14-fold higher than 
chromosomally stable cells. The magnitude of this increase 
cannot be accounted for by the increase in the modal chromo-
some number in each cell line. Thus, in addition to the few cell 
lines reported with checkpoint defects ( Cahill et al., 1998 ), frequent 
and persistent merotelic attachment of kinetochores to spindle 
microtubules is a common mechanism of chromosome missegre-
gation in aneuploid tumor cells with CIN. Increases in lagging 
chromatids at anaphase have been reported after perturbation of 
diverse proteins like BRCA1 ( Joukov et al., 2006 ), Sgo2 ( Huang 
et al., 2007 ), adenomatous polyposis coli ( Fodde et al., 2001 ; 
 Green and Kaplan, 2003 ), kinesin-13 proteins (mitotic centromere-
associated kinesin and Kif2a;  Kline-Smith et al., 2004 ;  Ganem 
et al., 2005 ), Mad2 ( Michel et al., 2001 ), aurora kinase ( Hauf et al., 
2003; Knowlton et al., 2006 ), cdc4 ( Rajagopalan et al., 2004 ), 
cyclin E overexpression ( Rajagopalan et al., 2004 ), and the Ndc80 
complex ( DeLuca et al., 2006 ), refl ecting the complex nature of 
establishing and maintaining proper kinetochore microtubule 
attachments ( Cimini and Degrassi, 2005; Salmon et al., 2005 ). 
Merotelic kinetochore attachments elude spindle assembly check-
point detection ( Cimini et al., 2001 ), indicating that CIN may 
arise through reductions in the effi ciency of merotelic correction. 
 The identifi cation of merotely as a cause of chromosome 
missegregation in CIN cell lines provided us the opportunity to 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/180/4/665/1336425/jcb_200712029.pdf by University Of Wisconsin-Madison user on 25 October 2022

CHROMOSOMAL INSTABILITY AND ANEUPLOIDY  • THOMPSON AND COMPTON
vidual colonies differ in which chromosomes deviate from the 
mode (Tables S2 and S3). Also, chromosome numbers among cells 
within individual colonies vary ( Fig. 2 A ), demonstrating that 
multiple, independent chromosome missegregation events occur 
during colony growth. These chromosomal changes are charac-
teristic of cells with CIN and demonstrate that chromosome 
missegregation does not obligatorily impair cytokinesis as was 
recently proposed ( Shi and King, 2005 ). Thus, elevating the in-
cidence of merotely in otherwise stable, near-diploid cells induces 
chromosome missegregation with the characteristics of CIN. 
 A striking outcome of these analyses is that colonies of 
both RPE-1 and HCT116 cells emerging after 20 – 30 genera-
tions with elevated merotely at each consecutive mitosis show no 
signifi cant deviation from two for all chromosomes analyzed and 
from a modal chromosome number of two for one or more chro-
mosomes when the incidence of merotely is increased during 
consecutive mitoses (Tables S2 and S3). The extent of chromo-
some deviations was higher in colonies of HCT116 cells com-
pared with RPE-1 cells and may reflect differences between 
transformed (HCT116) and immortalized but not transformed 
(RPE-1) cells.  Fig. 2 C presents the percentage of cells with 
chromo some deviations from representative single colonies of 
HCT116 cells and illustrates that chromosome missegregation 
is more prevalent when mitotic cells recover from monastrol 
compared with nocodazole and that maximal deviation occurs 
after approximately fi ve to seven consecutive days of mitotic 
recovery ( Fig. 2 C ). Importantly, both chromosome gains and 
losses contribute to deviation from diploidy ( Fig. 2 A ), and indi-
 Figure 1.  Chromosome segregation in human tumor cell lines. 
 GFP – histone H2B was expressed in colon carcinoma HCT116 
and Caco2 cells and in breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Images 
selected from time-lapse videos are shown with times given 
in minutes. Arrowheads identify unaligned chromosomes in 
prometaphase, and arrows identify lagging chromatids at ana-
phase. Bars, 5   m. 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/180/4/665/1336425/jcb_200712029.pdf by University Of Wisconsin-Madison user on 25 October 2022

JCB • VOLUME 180 • NUMBER 4 • 2008
 
and aneuploid tumor cells with CIN ( Fig. 3 ). For this assay, 
we collected mitotic cells by shake-off, spread the cells on 
slides at very low density