zotero
===SOURCE===Single-cell chromosomal imbalances
detection by array CGH
Cedric Le Caignec1,2, Claudia Spits2, Karen Sermon2, Martine De Rycke2,
Bernard Thienpont1, Sophie Debrock4, Catherine Staessen2, Yves Moreau3,
Jean-Pierre Fryns1, Andre Van Steirteghem2, Inge Liebaers2 and Joris R. Vermeesch1,*
1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 2Research Centre
Reproduction and Genetics, University Hospital and Medical School, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium,
3ESAT-SISTA, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium and 4Leuven University Fertility Center, University Hospital
Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium
Received February 20, 2006; Revised March 22, 2006; Accepted April 15, 2006
ABSTRACT
Genomic imbalances are a major cause of constitu-
tional and acquired disorders. Therefore, aneuploidy
screening has become the cornerstone of preimplan-
tation, prenatal and postnatal genetic diagnosis, as
well as a routine aspect of the diagnostic workup of
many acquired disorders. Recently, array comparative
genomic hybridization (array CGH) has been intro-
duced as a rapid and high-resolution method for the
detectionofbothbenignanddisease-causinggenomic
copy-number variations. Until now, array CGH has
been performed using a significant quantity of DNA
derived from a pool of cells. Here, we present an
array CGH method that accurately detects chromo-
somal imbalances from a single lymphoblast, fibro-
blast and blastomere within a single day. Trisomy 13,
18,21andmonosomyX,aswell asnormalploidylevels
of all other chromosomes, were accurately determined
from single fibroblasts. Moreover, we showed that
a segmental deletion as small as 34 Mb could be
detected. Finally, we demonstrated the possibility to
detect aneuploidies in single blastomeres derived
from preimplantation embryos. This technique offers
new possibilities for genetic analysis of single cells
in general and opens the route towards aneuploidy
screening and detection of unbalanced translocations
in preimplantation embryos in particular.
INTRODUCTION
Single-cell genetic analysis at the chromosomal or at the
molecular level is important for basic research as well as
for clinical purposes. An example is its use for aneuploidy
screening of preimplantation embryos obtained by in vitro
fertilization (IVF) (1). Aneuploidy screening of a single cell
would allow addressing basic questions about the chromo-
somal constitution of gametes and the mitotic stability of
chromosomes during early embryogenesis. In the clinic, this
screening could be used to select a single embryo with the
highest chance to implant (1). Several methods, such as ﬂuor-
escent in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR-based methods,
have been used to analyse chromosomes of a single cell, e.g.
a blastomere biopsied from an 8-cell embryo (2). However,
these approaches can only analyse a small number of genetic
loci in a single cell.
By contrast, genome-wide aneuploidy screening of a single
cell can be performed by comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) following whole genome ampliﬁcation (WGA) by
degenerated oligonucleotide primed PCR (DOP-PCR) or
linker-adaptor PCR. In this method, two DNA samples, one
obtained by DNA ampliﬁcation from the single cell of inter-
est and one from a reference, are differentially labelled and
hybridized to metaphase spreads derived from cells of a chro-
mosomally normal individual. CGH has been applied to
detect chromosomal copy-number changes within single blas-
tomeres or polar bodies (3) and within single cancer cells (4).
Nonetheless, this method is labour intensive and time con-
suming, which limits its diagnostic potential and hampers
its use in research.
Based on the same principle as metaphase CGH, array
CGH differs in that genomic clones from selected regions
of the genome are spotted on a slide, replacing normal
‘control’ metaphase cells as the target DNA (5,6). This
method has a high-resolution and is amenable to automation.
Thus far, array CGH has mainly been performed using DNA
from large numbers of cells. Attempts to reduce the amount
of DNA needed for array CGH resulted in the accurate
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +32 1634 5941; Fax: +32 1634 6060; Email: Joris.Vermeesch@uz.kuleuven.ac.be
 The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access
version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press
are attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 9
e68
doi:10.1093/nar/gkl336
 
Published online May 12, 2006

detection of copy-number variations from as little as 1 ng of
DNA (7). Recently, Hu et al. (8) have used array CGH for
the detection of chromosomal copy-number variation from
single lymphoblasts and ﬁbroblasts following DOP-PCR
ampliﬁcation. However, no robust results were obtained
since incorrect ratios were sometimes observed for chromo-
somes 2, 4, 9, 11, 17, 22, X and Y.
The
major
hurdle
towards
genome-wide
single-cell
analysis is the difﬁculty to amplify genomic DNA (gDNA)
without sequence bias. Recently, an isothermal DNA ampli-
ﬁcation method (termed multiple displacement ampliﬁcation,
MDA) has been applied to small DNA samples or single
cells, leading to the synthesis of DNA with limited sequence
representation bias (9–12). Here, we have extended array
CGH technology by making the accurate detection of chro-
mosomal imbalances possible from a single lymphoblast,
ﬁbroblast and blastomere following MDA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblasts and ﬁbro-
blasts were used to develop the single-cell ampliﬁcation and the
array CGH experiments. Four different ﬁbroblast cell lines
were derived from patients affected by, respectively, trisomy
13, 18, 21 and monosomy X. Fibroblasts containing an intersti-
tial 4q deletion (46,XX,del(4)(q13.1q22.3)) and EBV cells
containing an unbalanced reciprocal translocation involving
chromosomes 14 and X (46,XX,der(X)t(X;14)(q21.3;q23.1))
were used for segmental deletion/duplication detection. Array
CGH experiments were performed using gDNA from the two
cell lines containing a segmental deletion and/or duplication
to deﬁne the exact size of each rearrangement. For the ﬁbro-
blasts containing an interstitial 4q deletion, the size of the
deleted region was 34 Mb corresponding to 39 clones spotted
on the array (from RP11-340A13 to RP11-44P19). For the
EBV cell line, the size of the 14q duplication was 47 Mb cor-
responding to 63 clones (from RP11-62H20 to CTC-820M16)
and the Xq deletion was 58 Mb corresponding to 70 clones
(from RP3-380C13 to RP11-218L14). For each of the six cell
lines, three single cells were ampliﬁed.
Collection and lysis of single cells
Lymphoblasts or ﬁbroblasts were washed three times in
500 ml phosphate-buffered saline. The cells were then
washed
in
droplets
of
Ca2+-
and
Mg2+-free
medium
[14 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM KCl, 0.04 mM NaH2PO4·2H2O,
5.5 mM glucose, 1.2 mM NaHCO3, 0.02 mM EDTA and
0.01% (w/v) phenol red] supplemented with 15 mg/ml
BSA (Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MO) using ﬁne hand-drawn
microcapillaries and were transferred to 200 ml PCR tubes
containing 2.5 ml alkaline lysis buffer (ALB; 200 mM
KOH and 50 mM DTT). An aliquot from the last washing
droplet was taken as a negative control for each collected
single cell. The samples were stored at 80C for at least
30 min and were further incubated for 10 min at 65C
prior to the MDA reaction.
Embryo biopsy and disaggregation
Approval for the present study was obtained from the institu-
tional
committee
of
medical
ethics
(Vrije
Universiteit
Brussel) and all donating patients gave informed consent.
Embryo 1 used in this study was from a couple who under-
went preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for aneuploidy
screening, in which case FISH was performed for chromo-
somes 13, 18, 21, X and Y (13). Embryo 2 was from a couple
who underwent PGD because the mother was a Robertsonian
translocation carrier involving chromosomes 13 and 14, in
which case FISH was performed for chromosomes 13, 14,
18, 21, X and Y. The embryo biopsy was performed the
morning of day 3 after oocyte retrieval. A hole was made
in the zona pellucida (ZP) using two or three laser pulses
of 5–7 ms of a non-contact 1.48 mm diode laser system
(Fertilase, Octax, Herbron, Germany) coupled to a micro-
manipulator on an inverted microscope. Two blastomeres
containing a nucleus were gently aspirated and used for
FISH analysis.
The two embryos diagnosed by FISH as being abnormal
were selected for array CGH analysis. Embryos were brieﬂy
incubated in acidic Tyrode’s solution (pH 2.4) (Vitrolife,
Goteborg, Sweden) to remove the ZP. They were then trans-
ferred to droplets of Ca2+- and Mg2+-free medium supple-
mented
with
mg/ml
BSA
and
gently
pipetted
to
disaggregate the individual blastomeres. Blastomeres with
a clearly visible nucleus were washed three times in the dis-
sociation medium and transferred using a mouth-piece and
a ﬁnely drawn Pasteur pipette to a 200 ml PCR tube contain-
ing 2.5 ml ALB. An aliquot was taken from the last washing
droplet to serve as a negative control and samples and blanks
were further treated as described for the single lymphoblasts
or ﬁbroblasts.
Whole genome amplification
DOP-PCR ampliﬁcations and MDA with Bst DNA poly-
merase were performed using 1 ng and 100 pg of gDNA
as well as single-cell lysates according to the protocols
described by Hu et al. (8) or Lage et al. (11), respectively.
MDA with f29 DNA polymerase was performed using
the GenomiPhi DNA Ampliﬁcation Kit (GE Healthcare,
Piscataway, NJ). The f29 DNA polymerase was assayed on
100 pg gDNA and single-cell lysates. Prior to the MDA reac-
tion, 2.5 ml of neutralization buffer (0.9 M Tris–HCl, pH 8.3,
0.3 M KCl and 0.2 M HCl) was added to the sample to neut-
ralise ALB. GenomiPhi sample buffer (9 ml) containing
the random hexamer primers was added to the template fol-
lowed by GenomiPhi reaction buffer (9 ml) and GenomiPhi
Enzyme Mix (1 ml). The isothermal ampliﬁcation was per-
formed at 30C for 3 h and the reaction was stopped upon
incubation at 65C for 10 min. The MDA products were puri-
ﬁed and resuspended in 50 ml of elution buffer (High Pure
PCR Product Puriﬁcation Kit, Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
All ampliﬁcation products were quantiﬁed with a spectropho-
tometer (Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer; Nanodrop
Technologies, Rockland, DE) and their quality was evaluated
by PCR for two loci (IVS27AC28.4 and D17S1841).
Although spectrophotometric analysis showed DNA in the
MDA negative controls, no ampliﬁcation product was detec-
ted after locus-speciﬁc PCR in any of the negative controls,
e68
Nucleic Acids Research, 2006, Vol. 34, No. 9
PAGE 2 OF 12

proving that the ampliﬁed DNA was non-speciﬁc and did
not originate from contamination with human DNA. The
non-speciﬁc DNA is most probably due to primer-directed
DNA synthesis in the absence of DNA template or to
contamination of the enzyme with bacterial DNA.
Array CGH
For ﬁbroblasts and blastomeres aneuploidy screening, an
array (KUL Human 4K BAC array Aneuploidy screening)
containing 4114 clones [3587 BAC and PAC clones at an
average resolution of 1 Mb (14), 96 additional clones
(RP clones; plate 1, offset A1) for each of the chromosomes
18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 from the Human 32K BAC Re-Array
of CHORI BACPAC Resources (http://bacpac.chori.org/
genomicRearrays.php) and 47 home-made clones (CME)]
was used (15). The products were arrayed in duplicate
using a Lucidea spotter (GE Healthcare).
Array CGH was carried out as described previously (15)
with minor modiﬁcations. Non-ampliﬁed gDNAs from male
and female controls were used as references. Ampliﬁed
(test) and reference DNA samples (300 ng each) were
labelled for 2 h by random primer labelling (BioPrime
Array CGH Genomic Labelling System; Invitrogen, Carls-
bad, CA) using Cy5- and Cy3-labelled dCTPs (GE Health-
care), respectively. Since Cy5-labelled DNA gave higher
intensity signals than Cy3-labelled DNA, a lower amount of
Cy5-labelled DNA was mixed to Cy3-labelled DNA, 2.1 and
4.9 mg, respectively, as calculated from the spectrophoto-
metric values. Labelled probes were combined with 100 mg
Cot-1 DNA (human Cot-1 DNA; Invitrogen) followed by
ethanol precipitation. Resuspension of the pellet was done
in 45 ml hybridization buffer (50% formamide, 10% dextran
sulfate, 0.1% Tween-20, 2· SSC and 10 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 7.5) containing 400 mg yeast tRNA to hybridize a spotting
area of 24 · 60 mm during one night. The slide was blocked
with 50 mg Cot-1 DNA and 300 mg salmon testes DNA
(DNA from salmon testes, Sigma Aldrich) dissolved in
60 ml hybridization buffer.
Experiments using single cells containing a segmental
deletion and/or duplication were performed later. A second
array (KUL Human 4K_2 BAC array Aneuploidy screening)
containing 4013 clones [3475 BAC and PAC clones at an
average resolution of 1 Mb, 96 additional clones (RP clones;
plate 1, offset A1) for each of the chromosomes 18, 19, 20, 21
and 22 from the Human 32K BAC Re-Array of CHORI
BACPAC Resources and 58 home-made clones (CME)]
was developed using a new generation spotter (MicroGrid
II spotter; Genomic Solutions, Cambridge, UK) allowing
higher density arrays. Since the clones were spotted in duplic-
ate on an area two times reduced, ampliﬁed and reference
DNAs, labelled DNAs, buffers and Cot-1 DNA quantities
were also two times reduced.
Since non-speciﬁc DNA was present in the MDA negative
controls, we hypothesized that this DNA would increase the
background noise of each spot. To test this possibility, the
negative control DNA was added to the blocking solution
before hybridization. However, no signiﬁcant higher signal-
to-noise ratios were obtained suggesting that the non-speciﬁc
DNA was not a major cause of array noise and it was omitted
in all subsequent experiments.
Following labelling, hybridization and washing of the
slides, arrays were scanned at 532 and 635 nm using
a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments Inc., Foster
City, CA). The scan images were processed with GenePix
Pro 6.0 software. Data analysis was performed using Excel
(Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA). In short, spot
intensities were corrected for local background and only
spots with signal intensities at least 1.2-fold above back-
ground were included in the analysis. Since all clones were
printed in duplicate, two ratios of Cy5 to Cy3 ﬂuorescent
intensity (log2 ratio) were calculated for each. For the