pmc
===SOURCE===Results Identification of CNV events from RNA-seq data The overview of the CaSpER algorithm is shown in Fig.  1  (see Methods). The input to CaSpER consists of aligned RNA-seq reads and the window lengths to be used in multiscale analysis 24 . Fig. 1 Flowchart of CaSpER algorithm. The CaSpER algorithm uses expression values and B-allele frequencies (BAF) from RNA-seq reads to estimate CNV events. A normalized gene expression matrix is generated (Step 1). Expression signal is smoothed by applying recursive iterative median filtering. Three-scale resolution of the expression signal is computed. (Step 2). For the smoothed signal at each scale, HMM is used to assign CNV states to regions and segment the signal into regions of similar copy number states (Step 3). Five CNV states are used in HMM model; 1: homozygous deletion, 2: heterozygous deletion, 3: neutral, 4: one-copy amplification, 5: multi-copy amplification. BAF information incorporated into the segmented CNV events. BAF information is extracted from mapped RNA-seq reads using an optimized BAF generation algorithm (Step 4). BAF signal is smoothed by applying recursive iterative median filtering. Three-scale resolution of the allele-based frequency signal is computed (Step 5). BAF shift threshold is estimated using a Gaussian mixture (Step 6). CNV events are corrected using BAF shifts and final CNV correction is applied to all the CNV and BAF scale pair combinations (Step 7). CaSpER uses expression values and B-allele frequencies (BAFs) from RNA-seq reads to estimate CNV events. The BAF is a relative normalized measure of the allelic intensity ratio of two alleles (A and B). The allele A is the reference allele whereas the allele B is the non-reference allele. The BAF value of 1 and 0 corresponds to the absence of one allele, i.e., BB and AA consecutively, and the BAF value of 0.5 corresponds to the presence of both alleles, AB. CaSpER first generates an expression signal by quantifying the expression values of all the genes from aligned RNA-seq reads. The expression values for the genes are treated as a genome-wide signal profile. In order to eliminate the noise in the initial expression signal profile, CaSpER performs sliding window-based median filtering and computes the  N -level multiscale decomposition of the expression signal in multiple window length scales, where  N  denotes the number of smoothing scales. The window length is increased between consecutive scales so that the higher scales correspond to a more extensively smoothed signal compared to smaller scales. Next, for the smoothed expression signal at each scale, a 5-state Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is used to assign copy number states to regions and segment the signal into regions of similar copy number states. The states correspond to the CNV states; 1: homozygous deletion, 2: heterozygous deletion, 3: neutral, 4: one-copy-amplification, 5: high-copy-amplification. The emission probabilities of the HMM states are initialized by estimating them from the data. The HMM is used to segment and assign the CNV states to the  N  smoothed expression signal profiles. The basic motivation for using a 5-state HMM stems from how expression signal is interpreted and how the B-allele shift signal is integrated with the HMM states: states 0 and 5 represent deletion and amplification events that show very high evidence in terms of expression signal, i.e., very low or very high expression levels. We do not require an accompanying BAF shift signal for these states and we assign them deletion and amplification calls, respectively. The states 2 and 4 represent heterozygous deletion and one-copy-amplification states that require an accompanying BAF shift to be assigned final deletion and amplification calls. This is convenient because states 2 and 4 generally are associated with not-so-strong expression signal evidence to be labeled with deletion and amplification calls. Therefore, they must be corroborated with the BAF shift signals since the heterozygous deletion and one-copy-amplifications must be accompanied by allelic shifts. The HMM segmentation yields  N  segmentations corresponding to the  N  smoothings of the expression signal. After the assignment of HMM states, CaSpER integrates the BAF shift signal with the assigned states to generate the final CNV calls. For this, CaSpER first generates the BAF shift signal. BAF shift signal is extracted directly from the mapped RNA-seq reads using an optimized BAF generation algorithm (see Methods). Unlike other methods, BAF generation does not rely on an existing set of variant calls and this considerably speeds up the process of estimating the BAF signal. After the BAF shift signal is generated, it is smoothed using  M -level multiscale decomposition. CaSpER smooths BAF shift signal at  M  increasing window lengths where the window length is increased between consecutive scales. The next step is the assignment of the CNV calls by integrating the  M  smoothed BA