pmc
===SOURCE===Results To distinguish between these explanations and to examine karyotype dynamics in chromosome instable lymphoma, we use a newly developed single-cell whole genome sequencing (scWGS) platform that provides a complete and unbiased overview of copy number variations (CNV) in individual cells. To analyse these scWGS data, we develop AneuFinder, which allows annotation of copy number changes in a fully automated fashion and quantification of CNV heterogeneity between cells. Single-cell sequencing and AneuFinder analysis reveals high levels of copy number heterogeneity in chromosome instability-driven murine T-cell lymphoma samples, indicating ongoing chromosome instability. Application of this technology to human B cell leukaemias reveals different levels of karyotype heterogeneity in these cancers.

Results Chromosomal instable T-ALLs show recurrent chromosome copy number changes We previously reported that CIN in T-cells induced by a truncation of the SAC kinase  Mps1  synergises with  p53  loss in lymphomagenesis [ 15 ]. When we re-examined our earlier aCGH data [ 15 ], we again identified recurrent chromosome copy number changes in a large cohort of aneuploid lymphomas, most notably gains of chromosomes 4, 9, 14 and 15 (Fig.  1a , Additional file  1 : Figure S1). The fact that these recurrent chromosomal abnormalities were detectable by bulk measurement aCGH (i.e. measuring the average copy number changes in a piece of tumour and therefore millions of cells) indicates that the majority of the T-ALL cells in the individual lymphomas displayed these aneuploidies [ 19 ]. Indeed, when we determined chromosome 15 aneuploidy in individual cells using interphase FISH, we confirmed that >70 % of the cells had three or more copies [ 15 ]. As  Mps1  truncation is expected to cause ongoing chromosome instability, these clonal karyotypes were unexpected. Two possible explanations for this are: (1) the malignancies somehow compensate for  Mps1  truncation, thus alleviating the CIN phenotype; or (2) the ongoing CIN is outcompeted by a selection that ultimately drives lymphoma cells to converge towards favourable chromosome-specific copy number states. If the latter explanation is true, T-ALLs should display cell-to-cell variability for chromosome numbers, i.e. karyotype heterogeneity [ 15 ]. Fig. 1 Chromosomal instable T-ALL display recurring chromosome copy numbers, as assessed by array CGH.  a  Two representative T-ALLs analysed using array CGH, compared to a euploid reference, showing recurrent gains of chromosomes 4, 9, 14 and 15, and other tumour-specific alterations. The  purple bars  indicate the mean log-value of the respective chromosome.  b  Cumulative single-cell sequencing libraries to simulate bulk data, showing a comparable karyotype as found by aCGH.  c  Single-cell sequencing analysis of four representative cells from T-ALL 1, showing identical chromosome copy numbers to the aCGH profile ( cell 1 ), or cell-unique copy numbers ( cells 2, 3 and 4 ;  red arrows ) Traditional methods to examine karyotypes depend on dividing cells (in case of normal and spectral karyotyping [SKY]), or are limited in the number of chromosomes that can be quantified per cell (in case of interphase FISH). An alternative to measure copy number alterations in a tumour is to measure the average DNA content (e.g. by aCGH) [ 19 ,  23 ], but this obscures intratumour heterogeneity. We therefore moved to single-cell sequencing as a method for karyotyping, making use of a modified scWGS protocol, described in more detail in van den Bos et al. [ 24 ]. Briefly, this scWGS platform involves single-cell sorting of primary tumour cells as nuclei by flow cytometry, followed by automated DNA fragmentation, barcoded next generation sequencing library preparation and shallow multiplexed sequencing [ 24 ]. To validate our platform, we first sequenced the genomes of 25 primary T-ALL cells isolated from an  Mps1 f/f ; p53 f/f ; Lck-Cre +  lymphoma that we had previously assessed [ 15 ] by aCGH-analysis (T-ALL 1, aCGH data in Fig.  1a ). We first compared the single-cell sequencing data to the existing aCGH data by creating an artificial ‘bulk sequencing file’ that has the cumulative data of all individual single-cell sequencing libraries (Fig.  1b ) to determine how representative the sampled cells are for the bulk tumour. Indeed, we found that the copy number changes in the bulk sequencing analysis were identical to those observed in the aCGH data (compare Fig.  1a and b ). However, when we plotted the individual single-cell libraries, we detected many additional copy number changes: while some of the single cells showed the exact karyotype as found by aCGH analysis (Ts2, Ts4, Del7, Ts9, Ts14, Ts15; Fig.  1c ; cell 1, more examples in Additional file  2 : Figure S2), most cells displayed additional chromosomal aberrations (Fig.  1c ; compare cells 2, 3 and 4 to cell 1, more single-cell libraries in Additional file  2 : Figure S2), reflecting kary